# 사순 제3주일 강론

혹시 지금 여러분 목마르십니까?

오늘 독서와 복음을 읽으면 나타나는 공통점이 있습니다. 장소적으로 모두 우물가에서 이루어집니다.

깔때기
예수님께서는 사마리아 여인을 만나 물을 달라고 하십니다.

입당송 에제키엘 예언서는 물은 정화의 의미, 새롭게 하는 의미를 지닙니다.
입당송 시편은 그물에서 빼내서 주님을 바라보는 인간 존재를 연상하게 합니다.

물은 구약 성서에서부터 자주 등장하고 큰 주제를 담고 제시되어왔습니다.
하느님과 계약을 맺은 백성은 이스라엘 백성
특히 오늘 독서에서 이스라엘 백성에게 하느님께서는 물을 주십니다. 주신 이야기를 전하고 있습니다. 이스라엘은 하느님에 대한 불평을 지도자인 모세에게 늘어놓습니다. 모세는 가운데에서 하느님에게 백성들의 뜻을 전합니다. 


전통적으로 교회는 파스카 시기의 절정인 주님 부활 대축일에 세례 성사를 주었습니다. 세례를 준비하는 예비자들에게 의미 있는 말씀이 될 것입니다.



어찌보면 고전적인 대화로 치부할 수도 잇겠습니다
하지만 여인은 예수님과의 대화에 참여하여
결과적으로 예수 그리스도를 통해 다른 차원으로 나아갈 수 있게 됩니다
그리고 그 가운데에서 매개가 되어주는 것은 물입니다

우리도 그 물을 청합니까? 그리스도께서 물을 주시기를 원히나요?
사실 우리는 이미 물을 청해서 받았습니다. 바로 세례 성사를 통해서 먼저 받았습니다.
우리가 청한 것을 잊고 잇었는지 생각해보고
그리스도께서 이끌어주시는 차원으로 나아가도록 성찰해보고 오늘 복음 이야기를 다시 돌이켜 봅시다.
그리스도께서 이끌어주시는 차원이 은총
(로마 5,2) 믿음으로 우리는 그리스도를 통하여
그분께서 베푸시는 은총 속으로 들어오게 될 것입니다.
로마서 5장 5절 동사? 부어지다. 물을 붓듯이?

야곱의 우물은 어떤 곳인가요?
야곱이 라헬을 만난 곳입니다. 
사마리아인들이 유다인들과 대립하였지만, 그들 역시 그리스도께서 오시리라는 희망을 마찬가지로 갖고 있었습니다.
그 만남이 우물가에서 이루어집니다. 예수님께서 그 만남을 이루어주십니다. 
모세는 바위를 쳐서 물을 주고
야곱도 바위를 옮겨서 양들에게 물을 먹입니다
예수께서는 목마르지 않을 물을 생수를 그분께서 직접 건네주십니다.


예수와 사마리아 여인이 나누는 대화는
제자들이 반응에서도 볼 수 있듯이, 유다와 사마리아 간의 오랜 대립을 연상시킵니다.
그러나 그리스도로 하여금 그 대립은 이제 다른 국면으로 접어들 수 있게 되었습니다.
성전에서 제사를 드리거나, 산에서 제사를 드리거나 하는 것이 더 이상 문제가 되지 않습니다.
그리스도께서 생명의 물을 주시기 때문입니다.

사마리아 여인의 남편이란 어쩌면 사마리아 사람들이 그동안 섬겼던 신들을 뜻한다고 볼수도 있겠습니다. 놀랍게도 이 여인은 그리스도를 만나 그리스도를 그의 공동체에게 전합니다. 사도가 하는 일을 한 것입니다.

이스라엘은 목이 말라서 모세를 통해 하느님께 물을 청했습니다.


----
# 1
Iª Reading: Exodus (17,3-7): Masá and Meriba: God always gives to drink
I.1 . The names of Masá and Meribá -in which an etymological relationship has been established with the fact "of tempting and contending" (brawl and temptation), of which the story speaks-, are surely names of ancient places that have been steeped in myth and legend. But it has also come to have its symbology in the attitude through which the people go through and through which all believers go through; that's why it doesn't matter much if we don't know where they are and in what desert. Jewish legend thought that this rock was following the Israelites through the desert. And from there Paul stepped up to make a midrashic reading, as specialists have revealed and glossed, from the perspective of the Christian who sees in Christ the great sign of God: "And the rock was Christ" (1 Cor 10,4 ).

I.2. The rock of Horeb on which Moses had to hit to give water to the people in the desert, in the sources of Meribá, has had a great tradition in the Old Testament, especially in the Psalms (78; 95; 105; 106; Wis 11 ,4). It is already known that the desert is the place of testing, especially due to the need to drink. Water, in Israel, was and is a treasure, because it is a small region surrounded by desert. A little bit of water is like a miracle and every drought is like a punishment and a temptation. The people, in the desert, are not compensated for their freedom from the pharaohs; They do not want to die in the desert, although they could have died as slaves and exploited near the pyramids of Egypt. But such is the fate of all kinds of liberation.

I.3. "Is the Lord in our midst or is he not?" It is the question of the thirsty people... what is the freedom conquered worth? The text wants to reaffirm the faith of a people in God, come what may and whatever happens. Moreover, the difficulties and adversities must be those that show faith in God, because He always, in one way or another, "gives us water from the rock"... God is in our midst, but we cannot demand that it show it as we want, but that we know how to look for "the water" that it provides us from rocks that carry a source in their entrails. Without the rod of Moses, without the miracle of magic, but with confidence and strength of mind, because God is indeed in our midst!

 

Second Reading: Romans (5,1-8): God offers us salvation "out of love"
II.1. The second reading offers us a key teaching in this Pauline letter. The truth is that the liturgy has not taken all of this set, one of the strongest and most dense of this Pauline writing. The apostle begins at this moment the heart of his letter (5,1-8,39) and he does so with a significant kerygmatic proclamation of what God has done for humanity, through Christ who "has led him" to the point of giving life for all This is basic in Paul's thought and in the proclamation of the condition of the Christian religion. We see here that it is God who goes out to meet man, not man who goes out in search of God. That is why we must continue to affirm that Christianity is the religion of grace, of offer, of the miracle of divine mercy and gratuitousness.

II.2. Paul here focuses his thinking on what it means in the present life for believers to be justified by faith. Salvation, then, is a grace from God that is given to us through our trust in Jesus Christ. The statement of this is of an unprecedented theological depth, said, moreover, by someone who comes from Judaism, like Paul. This grace is what defines the justice of God and the Christian life. This is what the Christian should boast of, believing and experiencing the grace that comes to us through the Spirit of God. Paul is trying to say that we shouldn't boast about the effort we must make to save ourselves, because he understands that salvation is a grace, a gift; but you also have to know how to welcome and appreciate gifts.

II.3. What, then, does the kerygmatic proclamation of Rom 5:1-11 mean? Well, justification or if we want salvation, to be more direct, has a strategy that God himself has established, through Christ. Although Paul is not going to be able to free himself from the language of the AT, from sacrifices and from death, we must not stop at that, but rather at what is stated. Christ died for the “wicked”… and since God loves us (v. 8), Christ gave his life for us. Was that death necessary? For God it was not necessary, and it is not God who delivers Jesus to death, but men. But Paul's formulation wants to make clear the divine initiative. This has happened because God "has loved" us and loves us...

 

Gospel: John (4): The living water of a religion of grace
III.1 . The Gospel of Saint John (on this Sunday Matthew is dispensed with), offers us one of the best-constructed scenes and dialogues of the fourth evangelist. We have all ever heard this story of Jesus and the Samaritan woman; although we have not always been able to cover all its meaning and depth. We may not hear it in its entirety today, but its meaning is the same that we expose. Jesus passes through the territory of heretics, as the Samaritans were considered by orthodox Jews. It is an old story of hatred and grudges because of religion. The Samaritans considered themselves heirs of the patriarchs, they had their Pentateuch, they believed in Yahweh, in God, but both thought that their "god" was better than the other, and their temple, and their holy mountain, and their water and their sources. The scene is set in Samaria.

III.2.The Samaritans come from the union of Assyrian tribes and Jews from the Northern Kingdom before its destruction in 721 BC. C.. Later a true schism between Jews and Samaritans was reached, as a rigor of the Jewish reform that follows the exile of Babylon. The Samaritans opposed the construction of the new Temple for the Jews. They built another sanctuary for them on Mount Garizim, which was destroyed in 129 B.C. 33,19;48,22; Jos 24,32). Samaritans only believe in the five books of the Pentateuch; Samaritan tribes still exist today. A religious Jew should avoid all contact with the Samaritans, not only impure, but heretics, and the least one could think of was asking them to eat or drink (Cf. Eclo 50,25-26; Lc 9,52; 10,33; Mt 10,5). In this story, a series of factors, many typological, will coincide to teach truths that we should never forget. Jesus, exhausted from the journey, leaves Jerusalem, goes to Galilee and passes through Samaria, which was a place avoided by pious Jews. He, Jesus, a man, a Jew, and if we want God "asks" a sinful and heretical woman. Jesus, to a Samaritan, to a person who for heresy could only give boredom and curse, he asks. We already know that Jesus asks him to give him much more. The dialogue is tasty, it is a dialogue with someone cursed. And Jesus offers "living water" in return. This expression in the AT meant: the values ​​of life, revelation, divine Wisdom and the Law (Cf: Jer 2,13; Zac 14,8; Ez 47,9; Prov 13, 14; Is 44.3; Jl 3,1). In our case, in exchange, Jesus offers for the water from the well (which can mean Judaism with what it promised and did not give, since the Samaritans were also Jews), "living water" which according to John himself is the Spirit that gives eternal life (cf: Jn 7, 37-39).

III.3.Jesus did not pass by chance along that road, since on the way to or from Jerusalem, this central territory of the Holy Land had to be avoided; he had chosen for himself the path by which he must pass; he feels tired, but, rather than on the way, because of these senseless religious disputes and he asks the woman (representative of an entire hated and condemned people) for water, he arrives asking, not offering. There is distrust, although Jesus has come to offer these heretics a new spirit, living water, a new cult, a true God. The water in the well was locked up and the well was deep; represents Judaism and Samaritanism. It is a criticism of religions that put so much effort into their things, their traditions, their customs and their rules. Both religions lacked living water, they lacked Spirit and true worship. We see Jesus listening to the complaints of the Samaritan woman against the Jews; but Jesus, in the gospel does not represent the Jews, although he is confused with one of them. Let us note that Jesus asks, in order to give; question, to answer; he feels thirsty, to offer himself as living water.

III.4.With this dynamic of contrast, the Johannine theology of this clearly emblematic passage proposes a new religion and a new cult: worship in Spirit and truth. The Spirit will make known what is the worship that makes sense: knowing God and worshiping him as Father. But the Jews and the Samaritans do not exactly adore a God as Father, but a god that they themselves have created in their own way and manner; the god who justifies their hatred and grudges. This religion, which often continues to be the dynamic of our current religions, is anti-God and anti-gospel. Today, therefore, we can also learn a lot from the ecumenical point of view in the celebration of the Eucharist with this Johannine Gospel. That not to pass from afar through the terrain, through the world or the lives of the damned; That request to give and offer happiness and true life in the name of the living God... is what is proper to the "religion" of Christ. There are many challenges that this evangelical narrative suggests to us. The story shows us a Jesus who in this case is not a simple Jew, but the Logos of God, who speaks and converses with a woman (who represents a people with its syncretistic influences, but after all a woman). … that discovers something new that comes from God. And then everything changes... past stories are set aside, rules that bind the heart and soul of religious people... and make it possible to discover God as Father. but the Logos of God, who speaks and converses with a woman (who represents a people with its syncretistic influences, but after all a woman)... who discovers something new that comes from God. And then everything changes... past stories are set aside, rules that bind the heart and soul of religious people... and make it possible to discover God as Father. but the Logos of God, who speaks and converses with a woman (who represents a people with its syncretistic influences, but after all a woman)... who discovers something new that comes from God. And then everything changes... past stories are set aside, rules that bind the heart and soul of religious people... and make it possible to discover God as Father.

----
# 2 
First reading: (Exodus 17,3-7)
Marco: We are in full pilgrimage through the desert in which the benignity and providence of God and the gossip and protest of the people are manifested at the same time in the face of the harshness that this pilgrimage entails. It cannot be forgotten that the Word of God comes out to meet the real problems of men.

Reflection

A people involved in serious difficulties protest against their God-Protector! This short and succinct description fits perfectly into the desert experience. Human reality is presented without embellishment, with all its harshness. This attitude, in the language of this book, entails protest, discontent, confrontation with God's plan. God's plan to lead them to freedom in possession of the Holy Land is not a good plan. Salvation history is littered with these attitudes. Backbiting manifests the permanent outbreak of man's first confrontation with God. Since then the image of God in the people has been distorted. The Good and Merciful God who frees him on his own initiative is insistently rejected. In the dialectic of the history of salvation, there is a risk of spoiling God's project, because God does not impose, but offers freely. God's answer to the bitter questions and reproaches of his people! "Has he brought us out of Egypt to make us, our children and our livestock die of thirst?" What are God's plans? These questions dramatically express the situation of the relations of a people with their God: they mistrust their liberator. This is expressed by the crudeness of the expressions. But God, who is faithful to his project, will carry it forward against all opposition and mistrust. Because he is God and not man. This is how Hosea remembers him, a few centuries after these events (1,7-9). This thought of Hosea strongly underlines the transcendence of God. But contrary to other older texts (Ex 19,2; 2Sm 6,6-8) or more recent ones (Is 6,3), here it is stripped of all terrifying character and is expressed in terms of love. Divine holiness is manifested by pardoning mercy, while man habitually gives free rein to anger. And this attitude of God is expressed in the "sign": he gives them the water they need. The reading ends by stating that that place was called Massá and Meribá, because of the brawl of the children of Israel and because they had tempted the Lord by saying: is the Lord in our midst or is he not? The question says it all. The attitude of the people that always appears throughout the entire history of salvation cannot be expressed more crudely. And the anguishing questions of men of all times, including ours of course, pressured and urged by so many needs and deficiencies caused by multiple causes. Imperious questions always arise from the depths of the bleeding heart of suffering humanity. God's Word answers. But it needs the mediation of believers who are committed to the humanization of our world in all areas.

Second reading: (Romans 5,1-2. 5-8).
Marco: This fragment fits into the same context as that of the first Sunday.

Reflection

Once again the gratuitousness of God is manifested! It is a permanent concern of Paul to reflect over and over again that God is free. That he is open to mercy and love always. And that this gratuitousness is manifested in the sending and the work of Jesus his Son. This theology of the free choice of God had an interesting background: the Deuteronomist interpretation of the events of Exodus. The Deuteronomist theologians insist time and time again that God has chosen his people and has offered them a firm alliance moved only by love for his people and his ancestors. This theology is picked up by Paul and translated and centered on Jesus Christ. He is definitely the expression of the gratuity of God's offer. I think that this aspect of gratuity should be firmly insisted on. Within the framework of the reading, terms such as these are insisted on: "we glory even in tribulations, knowing that tribulation engenders patience; patience, proven virtue; proven virtue, hope and hope does not disappoint" (Rm 5, 3-5). Both in the pilgrimage through the desert (first reading) and in the Christian experience, God's gratuitousness must find a firm response from man. The sense of path and progress that the Christian life has encounters serious difficulties and suffering. But everything is oriented to maturity in hope. And again the theme of God's love that guarantees hope. The presence of Jesus in history, irrefutable argument of God's love! The ultimate proof of God's love, proof that God takes us seriously, it is that he has sent his own Son. Jesus, being enemies, gives his life for all. And this proof is irrefutable. The history of salvation has been a pedagogy used by God. This pedagogy of God culminates in the life and work of Jesus.

Gospel: (John 4,5-42).
Framework: The fragment is part of a whole (Jn 2-4) with a common theme, namely that with Jesus everything begins anew: re-birth by water and the Spirit (Jn 3) and a new relationship of the men with God in Spirit and truth, that is, universal and for all men (Jn 4).

Reflection

The offer of living water that man needs!

The Samaritan woman comes to draw water from Jacob's well. The well contains living water, because it is not from a cistern but from a spring. The dialogue between Jesus and the Samaritan woman develops from a style peculiar to John: misunderstanding. The theme is living water. The Samaritan woman persists in thinking about the water from the well and Jesus wants to lead her pedagogically to another world of realities. And this reality that he promises is double: Jesus himself is the source of living water (Wisdom) and source of life to offer men the true significance and meaning of him. And the Gift that is the Holy Spirit is also living water. The Samaritan does not quite understand. The revelation of Jesus is aimed at giving meaning to the existence of man. The true worship from the intimacy of man guided by the Spirit! Faced with the incomprehension of the Samaritan woman, Jesus tells her to go call her husband. The evangelist, who thinks in Aramaic even though he writes in Greek, plays with the term "husband" (ba`al) that was used in ancient times to also indicate "false gods" (be`alim means husband and the god Ba'ál). . And therein lies the drama and the contrast of the expressions: Samaria worships five false gods and the one she worships now is not the true one. An entire stage of the history of salvation is synthesized. John recalls the theology of Hosea and the salvation experience of the people of Israel. A call to sincere fidelity with the true God. Jesus is the Prophet who knows human intimacy! The Samaritan woman is amazed. He is not conversing with a simple Jew, against whom he feels scruples as a woman and as a Samaritan, but he is a prophet. And in his people a prophet similar to Moses is expected. Where is there to worship the true God? And the prophet was expected to settle this question with divine authority and Jesus does so by taking it to another field of reflection. Credibility of the testimony that leads to Jesus! The rest of the reading raises a serious problem that could be summarized in this question that believers asked themselves at the end of the SI: how does the believer meet Jesus? How do they have access to that encounter? The Samaritans, supported by the testimony of the Samaritan woman, run to meet the prophet whom they can listen to. The testimony of the Samaritan woman was necessary, but she has already fulfilled her mission: to meet personally with the prophet who agrees to stay with them for two days.

The highly dramatic story begins by recognizing that Jesus shares our weakness in everything except sin, develops in a delicate and profound encounter with our human situation (symbolized by the Samaritan woman) and ends by offering great security to men of all walks of life. times opening doors and breaking down all the borders of division because the God who has sent him is the Father of all men. The Samaritans recognize in him the Savior of the whole world.

----
# 3 guia
Today's Gospel Reflection
thirst, search engine
It is difficult for our body to endure thirst for a long time; immediately we try to go for the water that can quench it for us... That was, precisely, what the people of Israel lived in the desert and the Samaritan woman of Sychar: thirst moved them to search, to cry out, to get moving and « on the way".

It is that thirst is a symbol of a very radical human experience: we feel constitutively lacking, we realize that we are not complete... we feel "the lack of..." (and in the case of millions of brothers, the lack of the basic elements to live with dignity…) It is true that this experience can lock us in frustration, complaints and isolation. For this reason, it is necessary that lack awaken desire in us, a longing for fulfillment that becomes our vital search engine. Blessed search that puts us face to face with God and with others for the encounter! Lent that we are going through is, then, like that desert experience that helps us to recognize the thirst and desire that go through us, and to recognize God as the Source that we need and seek...

Although, in truth, when we go out in search of God... it is always He who comes out to meet us first! Well, He was already looking for us before... as reflected in this encounter between Jesus and the Samaritan woman.

A restorative dialogue
Today's gospel brings us closer to Jesu s' dialogue with the Samaritan woman. A paradigmatic dialogue of our "encounter process" with Jesus, a dialogue that is born motivated by thirst and that, in the end, culminates in quenching that thirst because it guides pedagogically in the encounter with the source itself.

Thus, from the experience of physical thirst and water, Jesus helps the Samaritan woman to become aware of her own inner thirst: for meaning, fullness, freedom... Jesus, on the one hand, directs her until she can assume her life situation: "I don't have a husband"... On the other hand, words like "living water", "spring of water that springs up to eternal life", help her to open up, awakening in her the hope so deeply rooted in her people: "When he comes, the Messiah will tell us everything." It is there, when, from his own truth and in the opening of her desire, Jesus reveals her identity: "I am the one who speaks with you."

"I am", in the Bible, refers to the name of God; Thus, from this sentence, we can venture to recognize Jesus himself as the "personal dialogue" that God establishes with each one of us, since He himself defines himself as "the one who speaks with you"... So, how can we not recognize that our very existence is a dialogue with God and that only in this dialogue are we "ourselves"?

Only in dialogue with God are we what we are called to be, only "facing Him" ​​are we restored to our own identity... Well, the word of Jesus -and He himself as Word- has the virtue of igniting and awakening in us the love (« Verbum spirans amorem» , Thomas Aquinas called it) and, in this way, quenches our thirst, because it reveals to us the spring that we are, the fountain that we carry inside: the Love of God, poured out in our hearts.

A Spring of Love in our hearts
The restorative dialogue places us, then, face to face with ourselves and with the Gift of God, that "gift of God" that Jesus invited the Samaritan woman to know and which, according to the Apostle, is the Love of God "that has been poured out in our hearts with the Holy Spirit who has been given to us" (Rom 5:5).

Saint Augustine already said that love is the force that moves us to act (cf. Confessions XIII, 9, 10), and for this reason, God, who wants our freedom, makes us truly free by helping us to live from his Love, from his Spirit. Well, if we do not live from that Source, connected to that Spring of Love that inhabits us, we will be dragged, by the necessity of our thirst, towards dry wells or cisterns of sick water.

"Give me a drink" Jesus asked the Samaritan woman and our contemporaries also ask us today in their deaf cries and in their multiple needs, from the most elementary, such as clothing, food, a dignified life and justice..., to the most radical like peace, meaning and happiness... How to help quench so much thirst that is around us? How to connect with the spring that within us jumps to eternal life to bring that freshness to our thirsty world? How to delve into this restoring dialogue of our identity and thus, with Jesus, be the "living word" that awakens love and freedom around us?